---
title: Else and Else-If Directives
status: DRAFTED
created_at: 2022
---

# Else and Else-If Directives

## Summary

This proposal supersedes the existing `if:true` and `if:else` directives to add directives that express "else" and "else if" logic.

## Basic example

```html
<!-- component.html -->
<template>
    <template lwc:if={abra}>
        Abra!
    </template>
    <template lwc:elseif={kadabra}>
        Kadabra!
    </template>
    <template lwc:else>
        Alakazam!
    </template>
</template>
```

## Motivation

As of today, without "else" or "else if" directives, the developer has to chain `if:true` and `if:false` blocks together:

```html
<template>
    <template if:true={abra}>
        Abra!
    </template>
    <template if:false={abra}>
        <template if:true={kadabra}>
            Kadabra!
        </template>
        <template if:false={kadabra}>
            Alakazam!
        </template>
    </template>
</template>
```

This is awkward and unintuitive, and has an additional performance cost in that the property getters 
(in this case, `abra` and `kadabra`) are called multiple times, when once should suffice.

### Prior art

The concept of "else" and "else if" exists in most programming languages, and in many other frameworks:

- [Vue: `v-else` and `v-else-if`](https://vuejs.org/guide/essentials/conditional.html#v-else)
- [Svelte: `:else` and `:else if`](https://svelte.dev/docs#template-syntax-if)
- [Angular: `ngIfElse`](https://angular.io/api/common/NgIf)
- [Solid: `<Show>` and `<Match>`](https://www.solidjs.com/docs/latest/api#%3Cshow%3E)
- [Aura: `aura:set attribute="else"`](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/component-library/bundle/aura:if/documentation)

Some other frameworks, such as [React](https://reactjs.org/docs/conditional-rendering.html), [Stencil](https://stenciljs.com/docs/templating-jsx#conditionals), and [Lit](https://lit.dev/docs/templates/conditionals/#conditionals-with-if-statements), have no built-in concept of `else` or `else if`, other than that provided by JavaScript itself.

In the case of LWC, since we already have `if:else` and `if:false`, and since there is no ergonomic way to do conditional rendering in JavaScript (other than `render()`, which requires creating separate template HTML files), it would be most natural to align with the first group of frameworks.

## Detailed design

The basic design is to add three new directives:

- `lwc:if`
- `lwc:elseif`
- `lwc:else`

The reason for not reusing the existing `if:true` or `if:else` is that it is more consistent to use `lwc:*` for all three. (If there is a pressing need for negation, then we may consider a `{!foo}` or similar expression syntax in the future.)

### Syntax

Both `lwc:elseif` and `lwc:else` must be immediately preceded by a sibling `lwc:if` or `lwc:elseif`.

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:else></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<div>Yolo!</div>
<template lwc:else></template>
```

Whitespace is ignored when considering siblinghood. (This is consistent with LWC's current behavior, which is to remove whitespace between elements.)

Furthermore, these directives (along with `if:true` and `if:false`) are mutually exclusive, and multiple cannot be applied to the same element:

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:if={foo} if:true={foo}></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:elseif={bar} lwc:else></template>
```

The existing `if:true` and `if:else` directives _cannot_ be combined with `lwc:elseif` or `lwc:else`:

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template if:true={foo}></template>
<template lwc:elseif={bar}></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template if:true={foo}></template>
<template lwc:else></template>
```

#### Code comments

In the case of code comments, the behavior depends on whether `lwc:preserve-comments` is enabled or not. When _not_ preserving comments, comments may appear between conditional siblings:

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template>
    <template lwc:if={foo}></template>
    <!-- Comment! -->
    <template lwc:else></template>
</template>
```

Whereas when `lwc:preserve-comments` is enabled, comments become syntactically meaningful and therefore cannot be placed between sibling conditional directives:

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:preserve-comments>
    <template lwc:if={foo}></template>
    <!-- Comment! -->
    <template lwc:else></template>
</template>
```

#### Accessors

Similar to `if:true` and `if:false`, the expression passed in to `lwc:if` and `lwc:elseif` must use [simple dot notation](https://lwc.dev/guide/reference#if%3Atrue%7Cfalse%3D%7Bexpression%7D).


More complex expressions (e.g. `!foo`, `foo?.bar?.baz`, or `foo % 2 === 1`) are currently not supported.

#### Slots

A developer may want to use if/else-if/else chains to render a `<slot>`:

```html
<template>
    <template lwc:if={foo}>
        <slot></slot>
    </template>
    <template lwc:else={foo}>
        <slot></slot>
    </template>
</template>
```

In this case, the template compiler should _not_ warn about duplicate slots with the same name. This is a perfectly valid use case, and the template compiler knows for certain that the `<slot>` will not be rendered twice.

You might contrast this with the equivalent code in `if:true` / `if:false`:

```html
<template>
    <template if:true={foo}>
        <slot></slot>
    </template>
    <template if:false={foo}>
        <slot></slot>
    </template>
</template>
```

Today, the template compiler _does_ warn about duplicate slots for this case. But this actually makes sense, because the compiler cannot be certain that the `<slot>` will only render once. (For instance, the `foo` getter may have an inconsistent return value, returning `true` the first time and `false` the second time.)

#### Attribute values

To avoid typos (e.g. using `lwc:else` when you mean `lwc:elseif`), `lwc:else` must _not_ have an attribute value. Any attribute value is treated as a compile-time error:

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:else></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:else={yolo}></template>
```

Similarly, `lwc:if` and `lwc:elseif` _must_ have an expression as their value:

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:elseif={bar}></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:if="foo"></template>
<template lwc:elseif="bar"></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:elseif></template>
```

### Semantics

`lwc:if` behaves the same as `if:true`. `lwc:elseif` behaves the same as `lwc:if`, except that its behavior depends on any preceding `lwc:if`/`lwc:elseif` statements.


Similarly, the behavior of `lwc:else` depends on its previous siblings.

For example, in a series of sibling `lwc:if` / `lwc:elseif` / `lwc:else` directives, the inverse of the previous evaluated expression determines whether we reach the next directive:

```html
<template lwc:if={abra}>
    Abra!
</template>
<template lwc:elseif={kadabra}>
    Kadabra!
</template>
<template lwc:elseif={hocus}>
    Hocus pocus!
</template>
<template lwc:else>
    Kadabra!
</template>
```

Rather than rehash the basics of conditional logic in programming, let's define this as being analogous to the [`if` statement](https://262.ecma-international.org/12.0/#prod-IfStatement) (and friends) in JavaScript:

```js
if (component.abra) {
  // Abra!
} else if (component.kadabra) {
  // Kadabra!
} else if (component.hocus) {
  // Hocus pocus!
} else {
  // Kadabra!
}
```

Note that this means:

1. The property getters are only accessed once per instance of an `lwc:if` or `lwc:ifelse`.
2. Property getter access is determined by the ordering. In the above case, if `component.abra` is truthy, then none of the other property getters will be accessed.

## Drawbacks

This implementation would require the template parser to have knowledge of sibling nodes, rather than treating each sibling node independently.

This implementation would also supersede the existing `if:true` and `if:false` directives, which may lead to some confusion for developers.

## Alternatives

The impact of _not_ doing this is that it's much trickier to do conditional logic in LWC templates.

## Adoption strategy

This is a non-breaking change, so users can opt-in as they see fit.

# How we teach this

This feature is very similar to the same concept in other frameworks (Vue, Svelte, Angular, etc.). It's also similar to `if` and `else` in JavaScript. So we can leverage that familiarity when teaching this.

As for the existing `if:true` and `if:else` statements, we will need to mark them as "legacy," since they are rendered redundant by the new `lwc:if`. To ease the transition, we can provide:

1. ESLint rules to warn about using `if:true` and `if:else`.
2. Codemods to transform code that uses `if:true` to the equivalent `lwc:if` usages instead. It should be possible for this codemod to be consistent and non-destructive. (`if:false` is not so easy to replace, but it may be possible with a future, more complex expression syntax.) It may also be possible to replace an `if:true={foo}`/`if:false={foo}` chain with the equivalent `lwc:if`/`lwc:else` chain, but this is not 100% semantically equivalent (due to the number of accessor calls), and would be trickier to implement.

# Unresolved questions

The existing `if:true` and `if:false` directives work on arbitrary elements, not just `<template>`s. Should `lwc:if`/`lwc:elseif`/`lwc:else` work the same way?

How does this affect the [template AST](https://github.com/salesforce/lwc/blob/7d22e628375c28f529f09bf1353b0efb672bc47c/packages/%40lwc/template-compiler/src/parser/index.ts#L225-L245)?
